Index spi (#162)
pinot-contrib/pinot-docs: basics/indexing/bloom-filter.md

> # Bloom Filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Bloom filter
```

WHERE playerID = 12345
```

## Details

> A bloom filter is a probabilistic data structure that can be used to know for a fact if an element **is not** in a 

Reviewer: Does "probabilistic data structures" provide approximate answers to queries about a large dataset? If yes, we may not want to say "know for a fact"

Author: a probabilistic data structure is one that may return false results. In this case, if a bloom filter is used to answer whether or not a specific value is in a set. The special property of this probabilistic data structure is that *if the answer is false, we can be sure the value is not in the set*. On the other hand, *if the answer is true, we know that the value **might** be in the set*.

Another interesting property is that there is a mathematical relation between the size of the bloom filter and the probability to return a false positive (as said, there are no false negatives).

Therefore we (and a lot of databases) use bloom filter to discard large continuous set of rows.

Feel free to suggest (or directly change) the text in case you find a better way to introduce them. Anyway, bloom filters are commonly used in OLAP databases. As you can see, before this PR they weren't even introduced in the documentation. Link to the wiki in case it can provide more context: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter

> A bloom filter is a probabilistic data structure that can be used to know for a fact if an element **is not** in a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A bloom filter is a probabilistic data structure used to determine whether an element **is not** in a dataset. If a result is false, we can be sure the value is not in the set. Otherwise, the value might be in the set.

```

Author: That is incorrect. They *do not return* false positives.

> dataset but they cannot be used to know if an element **is** in a dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dataset. (Cannot find whether an element is in a dataset.)
```

Author: I'm obviously not a native speaker, but it seems very strange to me to have a whole sentence between parenthesis. I don't think I've ever read a technical document that does that.

Reviewer: thank you, @gortiz--it isn't unusual to have an entire sentence in parentheses--when the idea is a complete sentence, and the sentence is an a side note, which is not essential to the main idea. In this case, the main idea being a false answer determines the answer is not in the dataset.

That said, we can improve this sentence by focusing more on the affirmative. I'm reviewing all comments, making notes, and going back to the latest PR to finalize updates.

> The reason for that is that bloom filters return false positives but never return false negatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Why do you want to remove this line?

Reviewer: I think we can combine lines 16-18 to simplify, and retain the idea.

> One interesting property of these filters is that there is a mathematical formula that relates their size, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Bloom filter uses a mathematical formula that relates their size, 
```

Reviewer: does size refer to the size of the dataset or the size of the Bloom filter?

Author: size of the bloom filter

> the cardinality of the dataset they index and the rate of false positives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the cardinality of the dataset they index, and the rate of false positives.
```

> In Pinot this cardinality is the number of unique values expected on each segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Pinot, the dataset cardinality used in Bloom filter calculation is the number of unique values expected on each segment.
```

Reviewer: can folks change this number expected on each segment?

Author: It depends on the data they have and how they split them in segments. But given the large amount of data, I wouldn't say they can totally control it. It usually an approximation. For example, assuming you are storing the population of each city, you know that the cardinality will be at most around 100M.

> The false positive rate and the size of the index can be configured if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Why do you think we should remove this?

## Configuration

Bloom filters are disabled by default.
This means that columns will not be indexed unless they are explicitly configured in the [table config](../../configuration-reference/table.md).

> There are 3 optional parameters to configure the Bloom Filter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 3 optional parameters to configure the Bloom filter:
```

| Parameter      | Default       | Description                                                           |
|----------------|---------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| fpp            | 0.05          | False positive probability of the bloom filter (from `0` to `1`).     |
| maxSizeInBytes | 0 (unlimited) | Maximum size of the bloom filter.                                     |

> | loadOnHeap     | false         | Whether to load the bloom filter using heap memory or off-heap memory |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| fpp            | 0.05          | False positive probability of the Bloom filter (from `0` to `1`).     |
| maxSizeInBytes | 0 (unlimited) | Maximum size of the Bloom filter.                                     |
| loadOnHeap     | false         | Whether to load the Bloom filter using heap memory or off-heap memory. |
```

Reviewer: using on-heap memory?

Author: usually is called just `heap` memory.

The lower the `fpp`, the higher accuracy the bloom filter has, but it will also increase the index size.
`maxSizeInBytes` has more priority than `fpp`.

> This means that if `maxSizeInBytes` is higher than 0 and `fpp` generates a bloom filter larger than this size, we will 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `maxSizeInBytes` is higher than 0 and the specified `fpp` generates a Bloom filter larger than this size, Pinot
```

Reviewer: generates a Bloom filter index?

Author: I think both are correct

> increase the `fpp` to keep the bloom filter size within this limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
increases the `fpp` to keep the bloom filter size within this limit.
```

> Like all indexes, a bloom filter can be explicitly disabled by setting the special parameter `disabled` to true. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable the Bloom filter index, set the special parameter `disabled` to true. 
```

Reviewer: would `special parameter` be accurate, or is the name in table configuration something else?

Author: It is a standard name we use in all filters.

Before this change, each filter was disabled in its own way. That is why this change emphasizes adds the `like all indexes`. But it makes sense to remove it given that someone new to Pinot that reads this in a few years may find that a bit strange

### Field config list

> As all single column indexes, they should be configured in the field config list using the `bloom` key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the table configuration, specify `bloom` key in the `fieldConfigList` configuration.
```

Author: We cannot use the specific `fieldConfigList` field here because it is not where the key should be added. Instead, we could use `fieldConfigList.indexes` here. I think we already emphasized that a lot during the document and that is why I preferred to use a not so specific terminology here.

Author: The example below is also very informative

For example the following table config enables the bloom filter in the _playerId_ column:

{% code title="Configured in tableConfig fieldConfigList" %}
```javascript
{
  "tableName": "somePinotTable",
  "fieldConfigList": [
    {
      "name": "playerID",
      "indexes": {
        "bloom": {
          "fpp": 0.01,
          "maxSizeInBytes": 1000000,
          "loadOnHeap": true
        }
      }
    },
    ...
  ],
  ...
}
```
{% endcode %}

### Deprecated configuration 

Although the recommended way to configure bloom filters is by using `fieldConfigList`, there are other 2 ways to 

> configure a bloom filter for a table in the [table config](../../configuration-reference/table.md):

Reviewer: have these two other options been deprecated?

Author: Yes, that is why they are using ####, which makes them a subsection of the `### Deprecated configuration`. Given the CSS we use, it may not be superclear, but it produces a useful table of contents

Reviewer: gotcha. Agree TOC is helpful. typically in addition to the heading, we'd clarify this in text.

Reviewer: added suggestion

> configure a bloom filter for a table in the [table config](../../configuration-reference/table.md):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend configuring bloom filters by using `fieldConfigList`. The following two ways of 
configuring a bloom filter for a table in the [table config](../../configuration-reference/table.md) have been deprecated:
```

#### Use default settings

> In case the default values are the ones that want to be used, include the name of the column in `tableIndexConfig.bloomFilterColumns`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use default values, include the name of the column in `tableIndexConfig.bloomFilterColumns`.
```

  ...
}
```
{% endcode %}

#### Customized parameters

When custom parameters are required, add a new entry in `tableIndexConfig.bloomFilterConfig` object.

> The key should be the name of the column and the value should be an object similar to the one that can be used in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To specify custom parameters, add a new entry in `tableIndexConfig.bloomFilterConfig` object.
The key should be the name of the column and the value should be an object similar to the one that can be used in the
```

Reviewer: If we add a caveat that something is required, we want to explicitly clarify when it's required.

In cases where it's up to the user to determine a parameter is required, we simply provide instruction on how to do the task.
